{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf610
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww23880\viewh17140\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Repeating Theory 
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Lev Manovich has already speculated in 
\i The Language of New Media 
\i0 about the parallels between the historical development of new media and that of older media such as cinema,1 but I would like to explore possible parallels between the histories of theories of a new media, here television in Japan, and those of a previous media, the motion pictures. New media are new to the degree that they are accompanied by a theoretical apparatus that stakes out their claims to newness, but just as Wendy Hui Kyong Chun has under- lined, the meaning of "new" itself often "contains within itself repetition;' as something is re-newed only after it has become old in a cycle that mani- fests itself through planned obsolescence and endless upgrades. 
\f0\fs16 \up8 2 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \up0 Theories too may replicate this repeated newness when they name the new, but likely again in a cycle of theory becoming-or being-outdated and then novel.3 Peter Krapp suggests as much when he argues that claims made about new modes such as hypertextuality either forget precomputer hypertextual modes such as the card index, or seem to recall the past as a confirmation of the dig- ital present: "Recollection becomes oblivion, the interface-principle 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 WYSI- WYG 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 b~comes 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 WYSIWYF: 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 what you see is what you (for)get:' 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \up10 4 
\fs24 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 One can see similar repetitions in Japanese film theory and Japanese tele- vision theory in their early stages, even when the latter was contrasted with 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 the "old" as a "new" media. Not only were there analogous efforts at arguing media specificity, comparing the new to the old, particularly through the issue of the relation of image to spectator, but also claims about the specific- ity of the new that, it was forgotten, were already made of the old. Such par- allels, I would argue, not only problematize arguments about the new and about medium specificity, but they can also, through close analysis, show how claims about new media can serve to mask larger continuities in the struggles over media in industrial capitalism. In Japan in particular, theories of film and television were deeply imbricated with historically specific but long-standing conflicts over problems of class, mass society, the everyday 
\i (nichijo), 
\i0 theory, and the place of the intellectual. 
\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\i\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Shiso
\f0\i0\fs24 \cf2 and Shimizu lkutar6 on Television 
\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 As was also the case with film, discourses about television preceded the ex- istence of the medium as a real presence. As Jayson Makoto Chun has sum- marized, prewar writings about television emphasized its ability to establish connections with the West, and bring the outside into the domestic sphere. Its utility for education and for national or imperial unity was also stressed, as well as its importance as a gauge of national progress. 
\f0\fs16 \cf2 \up10 5 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 These were all arguments made for cinema in its first decades as well.
\f0\fs16 \up8 6 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \up0 What was different was television's potential for live simultaneity, but that was a claim already made about radio. Chun argues that discussions of radio actually laid the foundations of prewar television discourse, even as prewar discussions of television then established the basis for postwar television theory. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Writings on television increased after the war, especially after broad- casting truly began in 
\fs24 1953. 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 Journalistic discourse concerning the medium was in many ways epitomized by Oya Soichi's expression of frustration in 
\fs24 1957 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 that through television Japan would become a nation of 
\fs24 "100 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 million idiots" 
\i (ichioku sohakuchika)7-a 
\i0 phrase that became such common cur- rency that it even appears in Ozu Yasujiro's
\i Good Morning (Ohayo, 
\i0\fs24 1959), 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 a film that centers on two boys who start a protest to get a 
\fs24 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 set. Other scholarly writings would be less alarmist, even as they attempted to specify what ~as particularly new or problematic about the medium. Arguably, the first major milestone in television theory was the November 
\fs24 1958 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 issue of 
\i Shiso 
\i0 (Thought)-perhaps the premier intellectual journal at the time-an issuethatdeclareditselfthestartoftelevisionstudiesandwhich,asYoshimi Shrin'yaclaims, proved "a major influence on subsequent television research:' 
\f0\fs13\fsmilli6667 \cf2 \up8 8 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Authors included not only such established sociologists, psychologists, and culture critics as Shimizu Ikutaro, Hidaka Rokuro, Hatano Kanji, and Min- ami Hiroshi, but also names such as Kato Hidetoshi, Arase Yutaka, and Inaba Michio that would later dominate mass communication research in Japan. The variety of wri~ersincluded the film critic Uryii Tadao, the film and liter- ary critic Sasaki Kiichi, and even literary giants Nakamura Mitsuo and Abe 
\f0\i \cf2 Koba. 
\f1\i0\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Shimizu's essay "Terebijon jidai" (The Television Age), which appeared as the leadoff batter in the issue, was in many ways seminal; 
\i Shiso 
\i0 even re- printed the piece in its 
\fs24 2003 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 issue commemorating the semicentennial of television broadcasting. Analyzing it, along with some of Shimizu's other television essays ("Terebi no honshitsu" [The Essence of Television], an 
\i Asahi shinbun 
\i0 essay from 
\fs24 1957; 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 and "Terebi bunmeiron'' [On 
\fs24 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 Civilization], pub- lished a few months before his "Terebijon jidai" piece in 
\i Kinema junpo), 
\i0 I will consider how Shimizu's focus on medium specificity, audience behavior, and the everyday is emblematic of early approaches to television, while also being oblivious to how early texts of film theory treated the same issues. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Shimizu was a prominent leftist sociologist who was active from before the war in such organizations as the Yuibutsuron Kenkyiikai (Materialism Study Group). In such books as 
\i Ryugen higo (Rumors, 
\i0\fs24 1937), 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 he had already voiced his concerns about the interactions between official and unofficial communication. Investigating the phenomenon of rumors after such events as the 
\fs24 1923 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 Kanto earthquake, Shimizu considered how breaks in official news information could be filled by unofficial flows of information among the masses, ones that could be both resistive and reactionary. While rumors were by definition without basis in fact, they could serve as social modes of belief that functioned as an alternative to inadequate official announce- ments. Shimizu thus distinguished between rumors born from the masses in crisis and those purposely created to foment unrest, even as he described how rumors could be manipulated or controlled through information. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Shimizu did not see television's flow of communication as either estab- lishing the rule of facts or enabling horizontal modes of social belief. He primarily considered television in contrast to printed media. Both may be mass media, but Shimizu saw a fundamental difference between reading and viewing. Reading, he argued, requires energy and concentration because the book does not provide the reality beforehand: the reader must construct it. Television viewing however, "starts from the image that appears at the endoftheactofreading;'leavingtheviewer"excusedfromthehardwork involved in creating and supporting reality by oneself' 
\f0\fs16 \cf2 \up10 9 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 A reader can stop reading in order to avoid being overwhelmed by the reality of the book, 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 meaning "one can desire only the degree of reality that fits one's capacity:' That is why Shimizu thought that the pressure to reform or reconstruct one's sense of self 
\i (jiko no kaizo) 
\i0 rarely occurs with reading, since there is always a critical space for the reader to negotiate such forces.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 10 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Television, however, is "forceful;' refusing to allow a critical space for negotiation; instead, "the entire person is absorbed" and possibly reconstructed.11The book remains in hand, available for critical reflection, while "the television program only exists on a metaphysical level;' leaving no evidence behind after viewing that can be used for critique. To Shimizu, this indicates that "the transition from the age of printing to the age of images is the transition from an era where we possess the evidence to one where evidence is taken from us:'
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 12 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 He asosociates this with the rise of monopoly capitalism. While he recognizes the potential of television, given its forcefulness, to deeply penetrate the viewer 
\fs24  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 if and when it did actually engage in critique of the current situation, he be- lieves neither commercial television nor Nihon Hoso Kyokai (Japan Broad- casting Corporation) (NHK) would allow that.13Given the capital involved, "the more advanced a media is, the easier it is for its content to become con- servative or reactionarY:'
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 14 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 To Shimizu, television is the culmination of capitalistic mass commu- nication. Earlier commentators on television, such as Kamimura Shin'ichi, had argued that the new medium represented the revival of the family, as fathers supposedly ceased seeking entertainment outside the home in bars or at the movies, and returned to the bosom of their family.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 15 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 To such theo- rists, argues Shimizu, mass communication is what removes the individual from the home and melds them into the mass. The motion pictures are purportedly the epitome of this, but to Shimizu, cinema actually represents an inadequate development of mass communication. 
\f0 \cf2 If 
\f1 \cf2 the history of the movies were likened to that of soap, cinema would be like women going to the village center to wash clothes together, and television would be like mass-produced soap, which everyone can bring home to use.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 16 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 People come home because television has succeeded in the true mass production and dis- tribution of symbols. Quoting Gunther Anders, Shimizu says turning on the 
\fs16 \cf2 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 is like "turning on a cultural faucet;' making television equivalent to modern utilities.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 17 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 To Anders, this had profound implications: 
\f0 \cf2 "If 
\f1 \cf2 the world comes to us instead of we to it, then we are no longer in the world. Instead we are merely spoiled consumers in the world .... 
\f0 \cf2 If 
\f1 \cf2 the world comes to us as an image, then it is partially present and partially absent, thus a phan- tom or illusion:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 18 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Shimizu does not go as far as Anders-concluding that through television humanity loses the world through a form of idealism, part because he wants to maintain a space for individuated reading. Still, the critique resembles Anders's. The problem is that the return to the home does not entail a new life for the family: under the power of the image, "they have come closer spatially, but they do not face or talk to each other. . . . People have not returned home from the movie theater; the relationship between screen and audience has instead occupied the inside of the home:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up10 19 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 To the sociologist Shimizu, this constitutes a problem. Resonating with what Jiirgen Habermas was writing about at the same time regarding media and the public sphere, Shimizu saw the home as ideally a space free of soci- ety, where the individual could become 
\i\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf2 "zero:'
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 "Human beings can restore their selves for the first time at the moment they become zero to society;'
\fs16 \cf2 \up10 20 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 gaining the time and freedom to complain about society. While he does not, like Habermas, theorize a space of discourse between the private and the public that can serve to mediate and check the two, Shimizu does share Habermas's worries that new media dissolve the boundaries between public and private, facilitating both the invasion of the private by the public, as well as the publicization of a reduced form of the private.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 21 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Television to Shimizu now structures that once-free time, leaving little opportunity for people to develop critical perspectives. "The human being that had become zero is now again absorbed through the television set in what is external to the 
\i home:' 
\i0 For Shimizu, a socialist, "Television cannot permit the conditions that foster the roots of revolution:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 22 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Before considering what Shimizu may propose as a solution to these problems, let us dissect whatever distinction he might make between the new and old media of film and television, focusing first on his contention that "people have not returned home from the movie theater; the relation- ship between screen and audience has instead occupied the inside of the 
\i home:' 
\i0 Despite asserting that the need to collectively watch images in a dark theater was a mark of the underdevelopment of cinema as mass communication, Shimizu essentially contends that the relationship of image to viewer does not change when the screen enters the home. This does not mean he finds no difference between film and television. While admitting he was not much of a moviegoer, he said that the confusion he experienced emerging from the dark symbolic space of cinema into the real world did not last long. Television, however, is on all the time one is not at work or sleeping, making unclear what is fiction and what is reality. This is even more the case with the realistic world of color television: "The vibrant world of television itself becomes reality, and the faded world that contradicts that becomes fiction. We will live under the rule of appearances:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up10 23 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 For Shimizu, then, the difference between film and television is primar- ily a matter of location and frequency. 
\f0 \cf2 If 
\f1 \cf2 film consumed as much time in the day as television, viewers would presumably experience the same rule of appearances. The real difference between film and television viewing lies less in the nature of the medium than in its space; the fact that television is, unlike film, viewed in quotidian space makes frequent viewing more likely, a condition that ultimately undermines the distinction between the image and everyday life. The everydayness of television, from its location to its re- petitiveness, was to Shimizu more central in defining the medium than its technology. 
\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 The Everyday in Film and Television 
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Not all of Shimizu's contemporaries concurred with his assertion that there was an essential similarity between film and television. The majority were engaged in a medium-specific argument about the apparatus of television, even as they, like Shimizu, could argue that the effect of television can vary depending on how it was received. Most did echo Shimizu's focus on the ev- eryday and contended that television's form of reception was fundamentally different. Kato Hidetoshi, who published his own book, 
\i Terebijidai (The TelevisionAge, 
\i0\fs24 1958), 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 the same year, argued that if all popular arts up until then were arts of the crowd 
\i (gunshu geijutsu), 
\i0 television involved the small group.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 24 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 This could disrupt the absorption in the image Shimizu presumed was equal between film and television. Sasaki Kiichi contended that the multiple viewers in the home put a brake on one-way communication, in the sense that, even if family members did not always talk together as they watched, there was a kind of "unconscious communication'' between view- ers, forming a distance that could enable greater control of television and occasional critique.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 25 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Minami Hiroshi went so far as to argue that this was precisely the problem with television from the standpoint of developmental psychology. 
\f0 \cf2 If 
\f1 \cf2 identification is crucial to the process of subject formation, then television viewing thwarts this by occurring in a place where identifica- tion is often disrupted by the disturbances of family members and domestic activities. Minami even suggested having a television for each family mem- ber as a way to prevent this.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 26 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Conceptions of the effects of television viewing on quotidian life may have differed, but most agreed on the central relation between the new me- dium and the everyday. Kato in particular defined television through the everyday-not only its content and place, but even its form of reception, he argued, is that of everyday life. Focusing on the relationship between the performer and the spectator, Kato argues that television renders spectat- ing, which in the age of the massification of spectatorship still necessitated proactively going to see something, into an activity that requires no special effort: one just remains at home and watches 
\fs16 \cf2 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 "because it's 
\i there:' 
\i0 "The unique characteristic of television as a form of entertainment;' he writes, "can be found in its rendering spectatorship everydaY:' Its relationship with quotidian life is both the danger and potential of television. To Kato, its ability to penetrate everyday existence provides it with considerable power, and could lead to the establishment of fascism in a time of peace. But its allegiance with an everyday that is not planned or scripted-evident in both documentary and sports programming-makes television a medium centered on realism, in contrast to the printing press, which developed out of fiction.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 28 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Whether writers see this relation to the everyday as positive or negative, they usually use the everyday to contrast television with cinema. Shimizu aligns cinema and television as image media against print media, but then consigns cinema to incompleteness because it has not penetrated the ev- eryday world on a massive scale. Kato sees cinema spectators entering a fic- tional world in such a way that they are incapable of relating it to an everyday context.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 29 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 And to Minami, television, unlike film, "does not leave the fiction world to be as it is, but rather crams fiction into the quotidian world and 
\fs16 \cf2  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 makes it recognized as part of the everydaY:' 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Reading these accounts, one encounters early formations of many of the ideas that would dominate later accounts of television, but it is important to stress their historical contingency. First, the association of television with the everyday and the home was based on an ideologically refracted view of the contemporary situation. In 
\fs24 1958, 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 a major sector of the Japanese population did not view television in the home but at television sets located in public spaces such as train stations or cafes. As Yoshimi Shun'ya argues, the association of television with the home is a historical construction that involved forget- ting television's history of being viewed by anonymous crowds outside the home. 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 31 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 This selective view of the historical context was in part class-based. When Kato argues that the content of television is the everyday, he does so by claiming that viewers recognize a certain reality in its content, seeing in home dramas, for instance, "the same furniture or dishes" or finding "little separation between the conversation of a mother and daughter sitting there and that found in a real home:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 32 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Yetin November 
\fs24 1958, 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 still only 
\fs24 8.2 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 percent of Japanese households had a television set: it was still a luxury that even the middle class could not yet acquire.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 33 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 In television theory, however, we 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 already see the construction of both the television audience and the Japa- nese as uniformly middle class, at the cost of ignoring significant sectors of the populace. Furthermore, considering that in 1958a major portion of tele- vision programming was foreign, the claim that Japanese would see them- selves in 
\i FatherKnows Best 
\i0 makes sense only if one adopted a deterministic vision of the televisual apparatus that in practically imperial fashion ignored geopolitical difference. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 This vision in part resulted from the fact that many Japanese scholars of television, like Kato, were schooled in American communication stud- ies.34Shimizu was often ambivalent, both criticizing the capitalist Cold War geopolitics of the United States-sometimes through the lens of Marxism and European critical theory-while also using American sociology and Deweyan pragmatism as the basis on which he built his arguments. \cf2 \up8 35\cf2 \up0 Other authors in the 
\i Shiso 
\i0 issue, however, repeatedly cite some of the major con- temporary American academic research of mass media and society, such as that of Paul Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson, David Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Leo Bogart. Although Japanese social scientists had closer ties to Marx- ism than their American counterparts, they also, like the Americans, seemed to have shifted the object of media research from propaganda to mass com- munications, a concept that, especially under the limited effects model, con- sidered the mass to be less a broad and long-term social phenomena than an accumulation oflevels of personal influence and short-term minimal effects. Several of the writers in the 
\i Shiso
\i0 issue, including Kato, Minami, and Hidaka Rokuro, were members ofShiso no Kagaku (Institute of Science of Thought), a long-lasting postwar research group that, while eclectic in politics and methodology, largely focused on "studying the philosophy of the common man"-that is, the ideas borne by the average Japanese.\cf2 \up8 36\cf2 \up0 Even though they could often produce bottom-up conceptions of cultural production, and use these to promote the reform of Japanese society-a reform-mindedness that Kato thought distinguished Japanese communication studies from those of America \cf2 \up8 37\cf2 \up0 -this reform was usually modeled on a modernization thesis grounded in American social science. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 It may not be easy to claim of Japanese scholars that they were, as Timo- thy Glander and others have charged of American media researchers, shift- ing from propaganda to mass communications research in order to protect television-and the media corporations they had financial ties to-from criticism as propaganda, thereby providing cover for more precise manip- ulations of media by Cold War industries and governments. 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 38 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Some, like Minami, were supported by sectors of the media industry, however.\cf2 \up10 39\cf2 \up0 As a whole, Japanese television researchers were operating in a space in which Japanese television was deeply imbricated in Cold War politics, as recent re- search on the relations between Matsutaro Shoriki (the head of the Yomiuri media conglomerate and founder ofNTV (Nippon Television Network), the first commercial television broadcaster) and the 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 CIA 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 shows.\cf2 \up10 40\cf2 \up0 While their positions do not neatly map onto the American debates over media effects- "limited effects"versus the "hypodermic" model-their writings could reflect how the contingency of American TV studies came to claim the essence of television theory, and thus how much Japanese television theory, as with the Japanese TV industry, was shaped by Cold War visions. 
\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 Forgetting Theory 
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Japanese researchers seem not only to be wearing the blinkers of Ameri- can theory, they also appear to be forgetting Japanese prewar media theory as well. Kato's history of communication research in Japan, written in 1959, declares that "the study of communication did not develop" before the war because of the lack of free speech and an obsession with foreign theory.\cf2 \up10 41\cf2 \up0 The line thus drawn at 1945helps valorize postwar media research as democratic and homegrown, but effaces continuities and the fact that, in this case, many early television commentators echoed statements originally made about cin- ema. Minami Hiroshi's arguments about identification, for instance, while cloaked in the discourse of developmental psychology, essentially replicate the efforts of the Pure Film Movement in the 1910sto create a mode of film- spectator relations that would allow for deep -interactions with the image, in part through attempts to eliminate distractions in the theater (such as the 
\i benshi,
\i0 or noisy spectators). Shimada Atsushi's arguments about television as art, while posing an intriguing thesis that it is the montage less of shots than ofTv programs in the flow of the programming day that makes televi- sion artistic, \cf2 \up8 42\cf2 \up0 heavily depend on film theory and echo the position of such early aestheticians as Shimizu Hikaru that only montage enabled cinema to escape the mechanical reproduction of reality that Konrad Lange defined as antithetical to art.\cf2 \up8 43\cf2 \up0 Further, Yoshimura Toru's argument that televisual signs are inadequate for transmitting concrete thought, and thus that print media should leave description to television while keeping the job of"form- ing consciousness" to itself, although based on a general argument about "image symbols" 
\i (eizo shinboru) 
\i0 that can include film, essentially replicates the claims made by Murayama Tomoyoshi and others over twenty years ear- lier about the "limitation" of cinema: film was too rooted in the visual and the bodily to depict psychology and complex ideas.
\fs16 \cf2 \up10 44 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 What I would like to concentrate on here is how claims about television and the everyday tend to forget how theorists argued decades before for an essential relationship between cinema and the everyday.Gonda Yasunosuke was one of the first. The
\i Principles and Applications of the Moving Pictures (Katsuda shashin no genri oyobi 
\f0 \cf2 oyo),
\f1\i0 \cf2 published in 
\fs24 1914, 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 described in cinema a cultural mode that not only aligns with the practical methods of under- standing used by lower-class audiences but also creates "the value of everyday life;' first, by enabling its audiences to become the subject of culture; second, by taking art (if not also scholarship) away from the halls of the elite, where in the Kantian dictum it was defined as "purposiveness without a purpose;' and reinserting it in the world of practical value; and third, by bringing the everyday world into art (through photographic recording) and simulta- neously allowing spectators to insert their everyday emotions and ideas into the film.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 45 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Unlike Shimizu IkutanYsclaims about the image, Gonda argued that viewing cinema required effort, as it was the spectator who supplied the silent film with sound, color, and three-dimensionality, "an unconscious but difficult task" that resulted in the viewer inserting not only their subjectivity but also, in contrast to Kato's claim, their everyday life into the film.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 46 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Harry Harootunian has already described a number of prewar Japanese thinkers, from Kon Wajiro and Gonda Yasunosuke to Hirabayashi Hatsuno- suke and Tosaka Jun, who looked to the category of everyday life as both a means of understanding modernity and an enabling concept for construct- ingabetterpresentandfuture.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 47
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Againstthosewho,likeYanagitaKunioand Watsuji Tetsuro, turned to an atemporal folk culture for an alternative to a modern everyday that temporalized everything, rendering all aspects of life in the present, these thinkers sought the possibilities entailed by newness, by a modern life that was novel because it was embodied by the manifestation of newness in everyday existence. The modern opened up novel personal worlds of experience, challenged existing social identities and relationships, and promised new realities that would be experienced in new ways. While this may seem to be a celebration of capitalism and commodity culture, to Harootunian, many of these thinkers believed that the difference between the abstract present of the commodity and the lived now of the everyday could enable a "revolution [that] came from 
\i within 
\i0 modernity" that could break the commodity form and resolve alienation. 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 48 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 I see a similar use of the everyday with film. Most of those thinking about the everyday wrote about film precisely because they saw it both as embodying the infusion of the modern into the everyday and as the primary means of expressing the novel forms of living found in the new everyday. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Gonda, for example, responded to efforts to forcibly locate cinema in districts (such as Asakusa) or in peripheral class cultures, first by reversing these spatial hierarchies; rendering the periphery the center, and second by then looking to the modern undermining of divisions of space, especially as enabled by capitalism, as a force breaking up even those hierarchies. Cin- ema became less an issue of space and territory than a question of time (the now), of experience, and of culture. Gonda was attempting to bring cinema back to the real world not by arguing for a realist style, or even for a realist aesthetic philosophy, but instead by arguing for an experiential realism, in which what mattered was less the ontological than the existential relation of film to reality. Cinema was conjoined with everyday reality more through the mediating actions of spectators making film part of their everyday ex- istence than through textual style or technological indexicality. Cinema not only ceased to be confined to the realm of disinterested art, but it would also undermine all such art, and diffuse it throughout lived experience. Art itself would then cease to have a proper location but simply become part of life. Gonda, who had been trained in aesthetics at the University of Tokyo,wrote "about popular matters in a popular mode" in his first book in an attempt to also relocate theory.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 49 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 If film entertainment returned culture to the everyday, his film study would take theory out of the ivory tower and bring it back to the realm of popular discourse. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Gonda was not alone in exploring the political possibilities of cinema's relation to the everyday.Modernists such as Hirabayashi Hatsunosuke, for in- stance, saw the machine art of cinema as less the domination of space than a means of eliminating the alienation between work and life, and of better presenting on-screen a more mechanized modern life through mechanical means.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 50 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Nakai Masakazu, whom Akihiro Kitada discusses in this volume, contemplated forms of "unmediated mediation'' in which the masses' practi- cally bodily interaction with cinema enabled them to fill in the gaps in such media with their world historical experience. The Marxist philosopher To- saka Jun, who is the subject of Fabian Schafer's chapter, offered probably the most suggestive ideas about epistemology and the cinema of everyday life. As Naoki Yamamoto has described them, Tosaka'sessayson film treated motion pictures as an essentially epistemological problem, 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 51 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 and his concern was elucidating how cinema had its own means of presenting thought. 
\fs16 \cf2 \up10 52 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 These means, Yamamoto argued, fundamentally revolved around everyday life, 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 or 
\i\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf2 fuzoku, 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 as Tosaka called it. In the first place, cinema had a unique abil- ity to inform people of their everyday life: "The screen;' he wrote, "teaches humans about the 
\i\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf2 goodnessof materiality,
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 the delight of the movement of matters in this world. These are the things we usually see in our daily life, but we haven't recognized their virtues until they appear on the screen:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 53 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 It can do that precisely because cinema is the art of the"everyday, presenting society in a sensual, not necessarily intellectual fashion, in such a way that society becomes visible in a concrete manner.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 54 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 There is something remi- niscent of Andre Bazin in Tosaka, especially when he focuses on cinema's unique ability to approximate everyday modes of perception: for him, "film's particular realism lies in where the actual reality of the real world becomes the aesthetic reality of the medium as it is .... Particular attractions of film are thus derived from a simple fact that on the screen we are able to see the world in the same manner as we observe it in reality:'
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 55 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 With Tosaka, however, the manner in which we observe things in reality is not a natural mode of perception but rather one that is shaped by 
\i\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf2 fuzoku, 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 the manners and mores of everyday life particular to historical relations of production. Cinema does not just approximate modes of perceiving reality, it embod- ies a society's-to Tosaka, mostly the masses'-ways of both thinking and confirming itself, of articulating and knowing itself in a social fashion. Watching film is then a means of experiencing, embodying, and eventually knowing the social formulation of everyday life. This is not solipsistic ideal- ism, but one fundamentally based on material modes of thinking, which is why Tosaka connects cinema to science. While Tosaka could not develop this idea before he was arrested (he eventually died in prison), others, such as Imamura Taihei, contemplated the possibility of cinema actually being a material mode of thinking that uses everyday things themselves as elements of thought. 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 56 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 This is one of the reasons that Imamura, the prominent theorist of documentary, was attracted to animation as a form: it enabled everyday objects in the world to expressivelyembody thought about the world. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 A number of important early film theorists thus believed that the relation between cinema and the everyday was a fulcrum for overcoming alienation and rethinking art and epistemology. Why then did early television theo- rists forget these precedents, and then actually assert the opposite about cin - ema, relating the everyday to television instead? First, we must understand that this forgetting is not uncommon: as I have noted elsewhere, the history o~Japanese film theory is plagued by such amnesia, especially as part of a "theory complex" that is crisscrossed by neocolonial anxieties and politi- cal ambivalences, in which Japanese theory is conceived as subordinate to 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 that of the West, and thus not sufficiently theoretical to be included in the historical narratives of film theory.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 57 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Second, the conception of the relation of the image 
\i\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf2 (eizo) 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 to the everyday might also have changed over time, es- pecially considerh1g the claims made in the "eizo debates" of the late 1950s, in which some participants, such as Okada Susumu and Hani Susumu, ar- gued that a new reality necessitated a new image, thus rewriting the image/ everyday axis.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 58 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Similarly, and third, one could argue that the content and meaning of the "everyday"had also changed after the war. Gonda and Tosaka are primarily discussing a social phenomenon, seeing in the new mass and public forms of interaction a novel form of quotidian life that represented a transformative modernity. The everyday of Shimizu and Kato is largely the middle-class home, defined by its privacy and atomism. Postwar theorists were facing a bourgeois consumer culture on a scale quite different from what it had been before the war. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Fourth, this is the foundation for the everyday having taken on a more negative political valence. Shimizu prizes the sphere of intellectual reading, and sees in the mundane space of daily repetition an antithesis that televi- sion comes to represent. Sasaki warns that the flow of a speedy and efficient modernity has entered the mind through television. While hoping that de- veloping new expressive forms based on nonwritten communication may help viewers "digest" television, he declares that it is "impossible for tele- vision in its current state to provide viewers with an experience of artistic stimulation:' To him, even if "television is a need 
\i\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf2 [hitsuyohin]
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 in everyday life, it is not a need for building a true human life:'
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 59 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Sasaki thus clearly distinguished between "real human life" and "everyday life;' with con- temporary television satisfying only the latter. One could find in postwar artistic intellectuals an increased suspicion of the everyday,fueled by anxiety about the spread of consumer mass culture, Cold War image politics, and disillusionment with the artistically conservative old Left. The promotion of avant-garde, experimental, or surrealist expressive forms by Haneda Ki- yoteru or Matsumoto Toshio was aligned with the project of undermining conventionalized modes of seeing that had become quotidian.
\f0\fs16 \up8 60 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \up0 Later on in television, Tahara Soichiro's stance on documentary similarly sought to battle against the everyday, but from within, making the goal "to make a non-everyday space or way oflife not outside the everyday but inside it. To drop out inside everyday life:'
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 61 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 In these accounts, overcoming the everyday, not recuperating it, was the means of overcoming alienation. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 This did not mean that the everyday was always a negative object. The end of the 1960s saw several attempts to reappropriate the everyday as a 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 radical realm. The television director Wada Ben in his book 
\i Engi to ningen (Acting and the Human) 
\i0 theorized television as that which is severed from both cinema and history: the everyday flow of expression that is resistant to thought. 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \up10 62 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \up0 The founders of 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 Man Union-Hagimoto Haruhiko, Muraki Yoshihiko, and Konno Tsutomu-concluded their famous 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 manifesto, 
\i Omae wa tada no genzai ni suginai (You Are Nothing but the Present), 
\i0 with eighteen precepts, one of which touched on the everyday: "Television is the everyday 
\i [ke!nichijo]: 
\i0 Life itself-to both the senders and the receivers. The mundane 
\i [zoku]. 
\i0 The massive details up until the encounter with the divine. Drama with a date attached:' 
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 63 
\f0\fs24 \cf2 \up0 It 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 was by being everyday that televi- sion could, to them, be a radical non-art, one defined by the present, the fluid, and the physical-by a kind of jazz. Miryam Sas, in this volume, discusses Konno's effort to seek out modes of thought within the "concrete, everyday labor 
\i process:'
\i0 a project that aligns with other attempts she describes to enact bodily modes of thinking and return to the physical everyday. One could argue, however, that this later reevaluation of the everyday is involved with yet another politics than that of 1950stelevision theory, one more closely as- 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 sociated with a late 1960s questioning of language and representation, par- ticularly the attempts to rethink the relation of the individual to media she notes in Matsuda Masao and others. Given the shift from a positive to a more negative approach to media, the everyday was neither transformative moder- nity nor bourgeois torpidity but perhaps a last-ditch, positive, less mediated site for questioning the modern regimes of time and narrative. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Classand EverydaynessofTheory 
\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 It 
\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 is important to acknowledge these debates over and transformations in the use of the concept of the everyday. As Chun suggests, there is repetition in each of these attempts to fashion a new politics vis-a-vis media. What I want to stress here is that each repetition involves a forgetting that at the same time also enables the repetition. The assumptions in early television theory that television was uniquely associated with the everyday, made at the cost of ignoring the history of cinema's relations with the mundane, functioned in part to repress the historical politics of the everyday, or, more specifically, the history of media's relationship with the everyday. To a certain extent this was a factor of the forgetting common to claims about a new media, as the assertion that a media is new often involves claims of medium specificity that assert too-clear binaries between media such as film and television or, as earlier, between film and theater. 
\fs24 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 I would also argue, however, that this forgetting is also a means of avoid- ing the problems underlying the project of the media theorist. Shimizu's groundbreaking essay ends not with a conclusion about television but with a call for printed media to combat the feared dictatorship of the televisual image. This core text about a new medium was then really about a suppos- edly old medium. Shimizu's turn to the printed medium was intimately related to what became his solution to the problem of television: theory, or 
\i shiso, 
\i0 as Yoshimi Shun'ya summarizes it. While Shimizu often placed him- self on the side of the people 
\i (shomin) 
\i0 against intellectuals,
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 64 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 his stance was in the end often that of the scholar enlightening the masses.
\fs16 \cf2 \up8 65 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 The threat to intellectual thought posed by television had to be dealt with through intellectual thought and only in the medium conducive to it: the printed word. But not only does this solution reproduce the hierarchies between the intellectual and the viewer (who is often of a lower socioeconomic class than the scholar), it ultimately argues that new media is inimical to theory, or that, in a corollary, theory's role is to control such threatening media. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Here again, early television theory is repeating early film theory. From the days of Nakagawa Shigeaki,who wrote the first philosophical account of cin- ema in Japan in 1911-only to reject film as an art-the resistance of many intellectuals to cinema was deep rooted, and, as is evident in the Pure Film Movement, could often manifest itself in film practice by only creating hier- archies between word and image, intellectual and spectator, modernism and modernity. Televisiontheory of the 1950swas largely in continuity with these structures of power, effectivelyreconstituting them not by recalling that his- tory but rather by obfuscating it, by stressing the difference of new media in its relation to the everyday.New media theory then served to mask continuities in the sociopolitical conflicts over media in modern capitalism. 
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 Early
\fs18\fsmilli9333 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 theoryalsoforgotGonda.AlthoughKatocitesGonda,hedoesso in the wrong field. What Gonda was ultimately stressing by focusing on the relationship between cinema and the everyday was not simply the new lived geography of media, but the problem of theory as well. The debate over the everyday was not just about which media was closer to the everyday or what constituted the mediated everyday, but also about the relation of theory to the everyday-the everydayness of theory. Hidaka also suggests this at the end of his contribution to the 
\i Shiso 
\i0 issue, when he declares that it would be purely illusory to study "100 million becoming idiots" without considering why there were no labor unions in the Japanese broadcast industry-that is, how capital operated on the everyday bodies of 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 TV 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 workers and spectators. 
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf2 \up8 66 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 A new media demanded not only a new theory but also a new way of doing theory, one that itself had to confront the problems of the intelle.ctual, mo- dernity, capital, labor, and medium through considering its own everyday- ness. Otherwise, it would simply repeat the theory of an older media. 
\fs24 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
}